Spanish (Romance)
Note 1: The Spanish words can be mainly categorized in three groups according to what is the stressed syllable: agudas, when the stressed syllable is the last one; llanas, when the stressed syllable is the penultimate (i.e. the last syllable but one); and esdrújulas, when the stressed syllable is the antepenultimate (i.e. the last syllable but two).

All the agudas words which end in vowel or in the consonants n or s, have a written accent on the stressed syllable (the last one).
All the llanas words which do NOT end in vowel nor in consonants n or s, have a written accent on the stressed syllable (the penultimate one).
And all the esdrújulas words have an written accent on the stressed syllable (the antepenultimate one).
Note 2: The s and th [θ] are not observed by all the Spanish speakers. In Latin America and some regions of Spain, people pronounce z and c before e and i (th pronunciation) as an s, this phenomenon is called seseo. On the other hand, when the s pronunciation is replaced for the th one, it is called ceceo.

Translation	Phrase	IPA	Pronunciation	Remarks
Spanish	castellano

español	/kasteˈʎano/
/kasteˈʝano/
/espaˈɲol/	
let's go	vámonos	/'bamonos/		
hello	hola	/ˈola/	listen	
good morning	buenos días	/bwenosˈð̞iːas/	listen	lit. good days
goodbye	adiós	/aˈð̞jos/	listen	from a Dios to God
see you (later)	hasta luego	/ˈastaˈlweɰo/	listen	lit. until (we see) later
please	por favor	/por faˈβ̞or/	listen	lit. by favour
thank you	gracias	/ˈgraθjas/
/ˈgrasjas/	listen	
you’re welcome
don’t mention it	de nada	/deˈnað̞a/	listen	lit. (it was) of nothing
sorry	perdón	/perˈð̞on/	listen	lit. (I beg your) pardon
pardon me	perdóneme	/pɛɾˈð̞o.ne.me/	
I’m sorry	lo siento	/loˈsjɛn.to/	listen	lit. I feel (bad) for it
forgive me	discúlpame
disculpe (formal)	/disˈkul.pa.me/			
this one	éste (masculine)
ésta (feminine)	/ˈeste/
/ˈesta/	listen
listen	
that one	ése (masculine)
ésa (feminine)	/ˈese/
/ˈesa/		
that yonder	aquél (masculine)
aquella (feminine)	/aˈkel/
/aˈkeʎa/
/aˈkeʝa/		
how much?	¿cuánto?	/ˈkwanto/		
English	inglés	[iŋˈgles]		
yes	sí	/ˈsi/		
no	no	/ˈno/		
I don’t understand	no comprendo
no entiendo	/nokomˈprendo/
/noenˈtjendo/		
I don’t know	no sé	/noˈse/		
where is the bathroom?	¿Dónde está el baño?	/dondesˈtaelˈβ̞aɲo/	
bless you	salud	/saˈluð̞/		lit. health
Do you speak English? (direct polite)	¿Habla inglés?	/ˈaβ̞laiŋˈgles/	(listen)	polite question
What is your name?	¿Cómo se llama?			polite question
hopefully, I hope (that)	ojalá (que)	/oxaˈla/		
