As in many languages, every noun in Spanish has a gender: it is either masculine or feminine. For example, gato ("cat") is masculine and mesa (table) is feminine. Almost all nouns ending in -o are masculine, most words ending in -a are feminine. The gender of unliving things is arbitrary and must be memorized, or looked up. Do not try to figure out what is "feminine" about the word mesa; it doesn't work that way.

In English we have two types of articles: the definite article ("the") and the indefinite article ("a" or "an"). Spanish does too, but there are 4 forms of each, depending on the number and gender of the noun.

Definite articles
Spanish Grammar • Introducción a la gramática
The definite article  El artículo definido

masculine	singular	el	el hombre	the man
plural	los	los niños	the boys
feminine	singular	la	la mujer	the woman
plural	las	las niñas	the girls
Indefinite articles
Spanish Grammar • Introducción a la gramática
The indefinite article  El artículo indefinido

masculine	singular	un	un hombre	a man
plural	unos	unos niños	some boys
feminine	singular	una	una mujer	a woman
plural	unas	unas niñas	some girls
When we want to turn a noun into plural, we follow these rules:

If the noun ends in a vowel add -s Example: un gato (a cat); unos gatos - (some cats).
If the noun ends in a consonant add -es. Example: el papel (the sheet of paper); los papeles (the sheets of paper).
Fortunately, the gender of Spanish nouns is usually pretty easy to work out. Some very simple rules-of-thumb:

If a noun ends in a, it's likely to be feminine. Example: bolsa (bag).
If it ends in o, or a consonant, it's likely to be masculine. Examples: libro (book), móvil (mobile phone).
There are some exceptions though, but you will learn these as you attain new vocabulary.

Go to the exercises.

Regular verbs
We have already seen the present tense conjugations of two Spanish verbs, llamarse and tener. However, tener (to have) is an irregular verb. Luckily, many verbs follow an easy to understand conjugation scheme.

In Spanish, the conjugation of a regular verb depends on the ending of its infinitive. (The infinitive is the basic form of the verb that you find in the dictionary; for example, English infinitives are always written with to, like the verbs to run or to speak.) All Spanish infinitives end in the letter r, and the three regular conjugation patterns are classified into -ar, -er, and -ir verbs.

Unlike English, Spanish verbs conjugate depending on the person; that is, they change depending on who is being talked about. This occurs in the English verb to be (e.g. I am, you are, he is, etc.) but in Spanish this occurs for all persons in all verbs. As a result, pronouns are usually omitted because they can be inferred from the conjugation.

The pronouns
Person in English	Person in Spanish
Singular	Plural	Singular	Plural
First	I	We	Yo	Nosotros
Second	You	You all	Tú	Vosotros
Third	He / She / It	They	Él / Ella
Usted	Ellos / Ellas
Ustedes

Spanish distinguishes between the singular you (informal tú, formal usted) and the plural you (informal vosotros, formal ustedes). Both tú and vosotros have their own conjugation patterns; usted follows the same pattern as él/ella and ustedes follows the same pattern as ellos.

In Latin America, vosotros is almost unheard of, and ustedes is exclusively used instead.

Nosotros (we) has a feminine nosotras that is used when the entire group is composed of females. Likewise, vosotros and ellos have feminine forms vosotras and ellas.

The Present Tense in English
Present Tense (en)
Singular	Plural
First	I play	We play
Second	You play	You all play
Third	He / She / It plays	They play
The Present Tense in Spanish
Regular -ar Verbs
Singular	Plural
First	-o	-amos
Second	-as	-áis
Third	-a	-an
Example: Cant-ar (To sing)
Singular	Plural
First	Cant-o	Cant-amos
Second	Cant-as	Cant-áis
Third	Cant-a	Cant-an
Regular -er Verbs
Singular	Plural
First	-o	-emos
Second	-es	-éis
Third	-e	-en
Example: Beb-er (To drink)
Singular	Plural
First	Beb-o	Beb-emos
Second	Beb-es	Beb-éis
Third	Beb-e	Beb-en
Regular -ir Verbs
Singular	Plural
First	-o	-imos
Second	-es	-ís
Third	-e	-en
Example: Part-ir (To split)
Singular	Plural
First	Part-o	Part-imos
Second	Part-es	Part-ís
Third	Part-e	Part-en
More examples
Llorar ("to cry"): lloro, lloras, llora, lloramos, lloráis, lloran
Cocinar ("to cook"): cocino, cocinas, cocina, cocinamos, cocináis, cocinan
Beber ("to drink"): bebo, bebes, bebe, bebemos, bebéis, beben
Comer ("to eat"): como, comes, come, comemos, coméis, comen
Deber ("to ought to do, to owe"): debo, debes, debe, debemos, debéis, deben
Leer ("to read"): leo, lees, lee, leemos, leéis, leen
Asistir ("to attend"): asisto, asistes, asiste, asistimos, asistís, asisten
Cubrir ("to cover"): cubro, cubres, cubre, cubrimos, cubrís, cubren
Escribir ("to write"): escribo, escribes, escribe, escribimos, escribís, escriben
Vivir ("to live"): vivo, vives, vive, vivimos, vivís, viven


Notes
There are many more "-ar" verbs than "-er" or "-ir". Make sure you are most familiar with these endings.
The second person plural is highlighted because that tense is only used in the variety of Spanish used in Spain. In other Spanish dialects the third person plural form is used instead.
When reading texts, you will need to know the person of the verb at a glance. Notice the pattern:
"O" denotes I
"S" denotes You
A vowel that is not "O" denotes He/She/It
"MOS" denotes We
"IS" denotes You All
"N" denotes They

Go to the exercises.

Questions and exclamations
In previous lessons, you will have noticed that we used an upside-down question mark "¿". In Spanish, questions always begin with it, finishing with the usual question mark. It is the same for exclamations; the upside-down exclamation mark "¡" precedes exclamations. Spanish is the only language with these two inverted characters.

This happens because Spanish does not reverse the word order to ask a question. While English says You are here / Are you here?, Spanish keeps the same order: Tú estás aquí / ¿Tú estás aquí? Whereas the English word order alerts you from the beginning that what you are going to read is a question, Spanish offers no such initial warning. To compensate for this, Spanish adds the initial question mark, so that you'll always be able to tell a declarative statement from a question from the moment you begin reading it.

Questions in Spanish are mainly done by intonation (raising the voice at the end of the question), since questions are often identical to statements. Te llamas Richard means "Your name is Richard", and ¿Te llamas Richard? means "Is your name Richard?".

You can also use question words, as indicated below.

Spanish Vocabulary • Introducción a la gramática
Questions  Preguntas

Español	Inglés
¿Dónde?	Where?
¿Quién?	Who?
¿Qué?	What?
¿Cuál?	Which?
¿Cómo?	How? (as in How does it work?)
¿Cuán?	How? (as in How long is it?)
¿Por qué?	Why?
¿Cuándo?	When?
¿Cuánto?	How much?
¿Cuántos?	How many?
¿De quién?	Whose?
¿A quién?	Whom?
¿De dónde?	From where? (Whence?)
¿Adónde?	Where to? (Whither?)
¿Para qué?	For what purpose? To what end? (Wherefore?)
Examples
¿Con quién?
With whom?
¿Dónde está el banco?
Where is the bank?
¿Cuándo es tu cumpleaños?
When's your birthday?
¿Qué fecha es hoy?
What is the date today?
Notes
If you refer to a group of people, you can use the plural quiénes.
Cuánto and cuántos have feminine forms cuánta and cuántas.
The archaic cúyo was used in place of de quién. You may still find it in books from the early 20th century. Outside of questions, the corresponding pronoun cuyo is still used to mean whose in declarative statements. (Feminine cuya; plural cuyos; feminine plural cuyas; this pronoun's number and gender agree with that which is possessed, not the possessor.)
Cuán is gradually becoming archaic and being replaced by qué tan.
Go to the exercises.

Summary
In this lesson, you have learned:

The Spanish articles (el; la; los; las; un; una; unos; unas).
How to conjugate regular verbs in the present tense (lloro; comes; vive; cocinamos; bebéis; cubren).
How to question people and exclaim in Spanish (¿Cuántos años tienes?; ¡Qué fantástico!)
You should now do the exercise related to each section (found here) before moving on. This is a very important topic for future lessons; it is important that you know it well.