Dialogue
Vocabulary
Necesitar	To need
Zumo de	Juice [of]
Raúl: Hola. ¿Qué compras?
Sofía: Hola, Raúl. Compro una barra de pan y una botella de leche.
Raúl: Vale. Así, ¿tomas leche y pan tostado para tu desayuno?
Sofía: Sí. Y tú, ¿qué desayunas?
Raúl: Normalmente, tomo zumo de naranja y una manzana.
Sofía: Y ¿tienes la comida que necesitas?
Raúl: Sí. Adiós.
Sofía: ¡Hasta luego!
Translation (wait until the end of the lesson).

Food and Drink
Bread	Cheese	Egg	Rice	Pasta
Pan (m)	Queso (m)	Huevo (m)	Arroz (m)	Pasta (f)
Tomato	Lettuce	Cucumber	Carrot	Potato
Tomate (m)	Lechuga (f)	Pepino (m)	Zanahoria (f)	Patata (f)
Apple	Banana	Orange	Pear	Grape
Manzana (f)	Plátano (m)	Naranja (f)	Pera (f)	Uva (f)
Water	Milk	Wine	Coffee	Tea
Agua (m)	Leche (f)	Vino (m)	Café (m)	Té (m)
Notes
(m) above indicates that the noun is masculine (el queso — "the cheese"; los plátanos — "the bananas"), whereas (f) above indicates that it is feminine (la lechuga — "the lettuce"; las uvas — "the grapes")
In South America, papa is used instead of patata and Plátano refers to a plantain or cooking banana whereas a normal sweet banana is known as a banana or banano.
While agua is feminine, it takes the masculine articles un and el. For example, el agua curiosa ("the strange water") and las aguas curiosas ("the strange waters"). This is because agua starts with an accented a.
Con means "with", sin means without (café con leche means "coffee with milk", café sin leche means "coffee without milk").
Wine comes in two varieties, "red" and "white". In Spanish, they are called vino tinto and vino blanco.
Examples
Me gustan los huevos.
I like eggs.
No me gusta nada la lechuga.
I don't like lettuce at all.
Me encanta el té con leche.
I love tea with milk
Me gustan mucho las zanahorias, pero los pepinos son aburridos.
I like carrots a lot, but cucumbers are boring.
What do you eat?
To ask what someone else eats, use Qué followed by a form of one of the verbs below (¿Qué comes? means "What do you eat?"). To ask what someone likes to eat, use Qué te gusta then any of the verbs below (¿Qué te gusta comer? means "What do you like to eat?").

Spanish Verbs • ¿Qué comes?
Eating and Drinking  Comer y Beber

Español	Inglés
Comer	To eat
Beber	To drink
Tomar	To have (food/drink)
Desayunar	To (eat) breakfast
Almorzar [in Spain, comer]	To (eat) lunch
Cenar	To dine (eat dinner)
Note
All of these verbs are regular except almorzar, which is one of the UE Verbs we learnt about in the last chapter; almuerzo, almuerzas, almuerza, almorzamos, almorzáis, almuerzan.

Examples
¿Qué te gusta almorzar?
What do you like to eat for lunch?
Como naranjas y plátanos, pero no me gustan las peras.
I eat oranges and bananas, but I don't like pears.
Me gusta comer uvas.
I like to eat grapes.
¿Bebes leche?
Do you drink milk?
A bottle of wine
Spanish Verbs • ¿Qué comes?
Eating and Drinking  Comer y Beber

Español	Inglés
Algo de	Some
Un vaso de	A glass of
Una copa de
Una botella de	A bottle of
Una barra de	A loaf of
Un kilo de	A kilo of
Un kilo y mediο de	One and a half kilos of
Un kilo y cuarto de	One and a quarter kilos of
Μedio kilo de	Half a kilo of
Un cuarto de kilo de	A quarter of a kilo of
Notes
We previously learnt "unos/unas" as the translation for "some", e.g. unas manzanas ("some apples"), but this only works for plural nouns. "Some bread" has to be translated as algo de pan or just pan.
Also, there are two ways of saying "a glass of". Copa is for glasses with a stem (mostly wine: una copa de vino), and vaso is used for without a stem.
Obviously, in all these phrases, the un can be replaced with any number (Dos vasos de leche means "two glasses of milk").
Examples
Tres botellas de vino tinto
Three bottles of red wine
Un medio kilo de arroz
Half a kilo of rice
Una barra de pan
A loaf of bread
Cinco kilos y medio de patatas
Five and a half kilos of potatoes
Go to the exercises.

In the Shop
In Spanish, as in English, there are many ways of expressing what you would like to buy, some of which are listed below. You will also see some other useful words and phrases to use when shopping for food.

Spanish Verbs • ¿Qué comes?
I would like...  Me gustaría...

Español	Inglés
Quisiera	I would like
Querría
Me gustaría
Ahí está(n)	There you go; voila.
Comprar	To buy
La cuenta	The bill / account
Cobrar	To settle in cash
Costar	To cost
Una tienda	A shop
Notes
Comprar is a regular verb (compro, compras, compra, compramos, compráis, compran).
With ahí está(n), the n is added if the noun is plural.
Costar is a O => UE verb (cuesto, cuestas, cuesta, costamos, costáis, cuestan), but obviously, you only use the third person.
Also, if you want to say "How much does it cost?" you use ¿Cuánto cuesta(n)? (cuesta is for singular things, cuestan for plurals, as seen below).
In a bar or café in Spain, one usually pays for everything on leaving ¿La cuenta, por favor? is to ask for the bill and it relates to the verb contar - to count or to tell. Alternatively cobrar (collect) relates to payment (or cash) ¿me cobra? = may I pay?


Examples
Quisiera una manzana, por favor.
I would like an apple, please.
Querría comprar una barra de pan.
I'd like to buy a loaf of bread.
Me gustaría comprar una botella de vino tinto, por favor.
I'd like to buy a bottle of red wine, please.
¿Cuánto cuestan las uvas?
How much do the grapes cost?
¿Cuánto cuesta un kilo de patatas?
What does a kilo of potatoes cost?
Go to the exercises.

Adjectives
"E" and Consonant Adjectives
In Spanish, clearly not all adjectives end in "o" or "a". The good thing about these is that they stay the same, irrespective of gender.

Adjectives ending in "e" add an "s" when in the plural.
Adjectives ending in a consonant add an "es" when in the plural.
Notes
When an adjective (or indeed a noun) ends in z, it changes to a c in plural, then adds the "es" (feliz/felices — "happy").
Examples
El hombre amable
The friendly man
La mujer amable
The friendly woman
Los niños amables
The friendly boys
Las niñas amables
The friendly girls
El hombre difícil
The difficult man
La mujer difícil
The difficult woman
Los niños difíciles
The difficult boys
Las niñas difíciles
The difficult girls
Colours
Colours in Spanish are just adjectives, so they still have to agree and go after the noun. They are shown below.

Spanish Vocabulary • ¿Qué comes?
Los colores  The colours

Inglés		Español
Red	     	Rojo(a)
Orange	     	Naranja / Anaranjado(a)
Yellow	     	Amarillo(a)
Green	     	Verde
Blue	     	Azul
Purple	     	Morado(a) / Violeta
Brown	     	Marrón / Pardo(a) / Café
Pink	     	Rosa / Rosado(a)
White	     	Blanco(a)
Grey	     	Gris
Black	     	Negro(a)
Notes
Adjectives can function as nouns if you add an article in front of them. For example, el morado means "the purple one".
Take care with Brown!
The plural form of marrón is marrones (without the accent); las zanahorias marrones means "the brown carrots".
Marrones glacés are (in Spanish as in Italian) candied chestnuts.
Hair and eyes color brown is usually Castaño (chesnut). Brown skin color is Moreno (tanned).
The adjective negrita (Literally:little black/bold face) is a term of familiarity or endearment is in Spanish and not to be confused with an offensive English expression.
Naranja is only the noun form of the word; when used as an adjective, anaranjado is used.
The color rosa ends in "a" even if applied to a masculine noun; el balón rosa, "the pink ball"
Examples
La manzana verde
The green apple
Los huevos blancos
The white eggs
El queso amarillo
The yellow cheese
Las naranjas anaranjadas
The orange oranges
Go to the exercises.

Summary
In this lesson, you have learnt

How to say some foods and drinks (la lechuga; una manzana; la leche).
How to say you eat and drink things (como, comes, come, comemos, coméis, comen).
How to say some simple quantities (un kilo de patatas; una copa de vino tinto)
What to say in a shop (quisiera; querría; la cuenta).
How to form adjectives that don't end in "O" or "A" (la tienda verde; los quesos azules)
You should now do the exercise related to each section (found here), and translate the dialogue at the top before moving on.